metabolic therapy could potentially
change the way we think about cancer
treatment
now if you or loved one have a diagnosis
of cancer I encourage you to discuss any
changes you make whether they are
dietary supplements or medications with
your treating physician first in my
opinion there will be very few cases
where metabolic therapy cannot be
implemented however there might be this
one other case where there might be an
issue and your treating doctor knows
best usually okay
they may not be aware of this so again
something that you might have to explain
to them because you know this is again
something that is fairly new and a lot
of Physicians are not aware of this
treatment right okay so let's get
started what is metabolic therapy for
cancer well
when we think about cancer treatment
most of us immediately think about
traditional methods like surgery
chemotherapy and radiation right but
there's another approach which is
metabolic therapy so chemotherapy
targets any cell that divides at a fast
rate right and since cancer cells have a
very fast rate of division they are
certainly targeted but as are some of
the other cells in your body for example
the hair follicles right or the cells in
your digestive tract which leads to a
lot of side effects obviously so when we
target cells that have a fast rate of
division we're not only targeting cancer
cells but we're targeting cells like
hair cells so hair loss you're going to
have nausea vomiting diarrhea
gastrointestinal issues malabsorption of
nutrients and so on and there are huge
side effects of course there right it's
a very crude treatment but that's still
at the point at this point it seems to
be the standard of care even though I
think this is something that you know
sometimes we overuse and or certainly
brings with it a lot of side effects and
a lot of risks for your life after this
chemotherapy is implemented again I'm
not trying to influence anybody about
the treatment that they are discussing
with their physician but just keep in
mind every treatment will have some side
effects and in this case I think these
are pretty serious side effects surgery
of course is you know trying to cut out
as much as you can off this tumor to
decrease the load in there you know as
much as you can to take out in some
cases surgery can be Curative where the
whole tumor is taken out of course right
and radiation is certainly
implemented and is getting better and
more precise where externally you're
having this beam of radiation that
targets the cancer cell or the tumor to
shrink it down right those are the
methods that we had until now very crude
and a lot of side effects metabolic
therapy approaches this a bit
differently right so when we talk about
metabolic therapy I'm going to talk in
very simple terms about cell biology and
that's going to review a couple of
things so we're all on the same page so
this is a normal cell in the cell we
have the nucleus in the nucleus is the
DNA the DNA is our genetic material our
genetic blueprint right and we certainly
know that there are mutations in the DNA
in cancer cells so that's been
established of course right we also have
these mitochondria and mitochondria you
may remember from high school biology is
where your energy is produced right you
take a glucose molecule goes in the
mitochondria and they have this thing
called the Krebs cycle or citric acid
cycle and they make out of this glucose
molecule they make ATP which is the
energy currency that the cell needs to
live the cell needs this to live to
incorporate protein tends to produce
things and to divide right this is
hugely important for any cell right
and in a healthy cell these mitochondria
work very well and you know together
with oxygen in an oxygen-rich
environment the cell can take in glucose
so sugar molecule right here and go
through oxidative phosphorylation this
is this citric acid cycle that you've
learned about in biology and produce 36
ATP so it makes a lot of energy from one
molecule right
so here's what becomes interesting
cancer cells when you look at them not
only do they have mutations in the DNA
but they also have malfunctioning
mitochondria and that is pretty much
true for all cancer cells so the cancer
cells these mitochondria they don't look
beautiful like this with all these
little you know uh formations of these
folds in here but they look almost empty
they look like this they call them also
ghost mitochondria sometimes and these
mitochondria they cannot use the sugar
molecule and do this oxidative
phosphorylation and get a lot of energy
out of it they can only ferment and
fermentation is a simple way to break
down a sugar molecule and it only yields
2 ATP per sugar molecule so it's a
really poor energy energy production
right so 36 in a healthy cell if oxygen
is present and the cancer cell even if
oxygen is present they can only do 2 ATP
what does that mean that means cancer
cells need a lot of sugar and you might
have heard this before cancer loves
sugar cancer cells thrive on sugar right
this is really important for them to
exist right
where do we use this in medicine we use
it for example when we do a pet scan so
a pet scan is where we take sugar
molecules and we put a radioactive label
on them right and then we inject them
into a person and then after this is
taken up we're going to do some Imaging
of the person and the interesting part
here is because we know that cancer
cells divide very rapidly and they need
a lot of sugar so remember they can only
ferment so per sugar molecule they only
get 2 ATP so they're taking a lot of
sugar in that means also they're taking
in a lot of these radioactive
molecules on there right and then when
you do a pet scan and you do the Imaging
the areas that light up because they
have a lot of this radioactive material
Incorporated those are the the cancer
sites in in the body right that's how
cats can work so we're using this
knowing this in some of the Imaging
Technologies that we have right
and there were some studies done that uh
you know implemented a ketogenic diet
they said look we understand that cancer
needs a lot of sugar how about we cut
the sugar out and that was successful in
some people in certain cancers people
really went into remission the cancer
went away there's some documentaries
about this you know this has been
documented in literature some people
only by changing this by going on a
ketogenic diet which means we're cutting
out all the sugar and carbs it's not
just simple sugar but you know
carbohydrates like bread and pasta and
all these things and we're reducing that
to less than 30 grams a day of
carbohydrates total carbohydrates and
we're forcing the body at this point to
go to an alternative fuel source which
is ketones right and ketones are made in
the liver by virtue of converting fat so
the body takes fat and the liver gets
broken down into these Ketone bodies and
these Ketone bodies are used differently
in mitochondria right so there's a
ketone body metabolism actually runs
very clean
the interesting thing is and you might
hear this from people that grow on a
ketogenic diet many people start to lose
body fat and they're generally becoming
healthier the diabetes improves so
there's some benefits at least you know
short term long term different issues
that's a different video but I think a
ketogenic diet can be useful even in
people that are not diagnosed with
cancer because short term we can see
some benefits there right
okay so these Ketone bodies can be used
by our healthy cells but they cannot be
used by cancer cell cancer cells cannot
use ketones right and if there is a
cancer that uses glucose as its only
fuel by fermenting it and you're taking
the glucose away then those cells die
and then the cancer cells go away right
that's the whole idea now this is
unfortunately this didn't hold true for
everybody with cancer and there were
many studies done where it didn't work
and I was also fascinated by this I said
well why does it not work for everybody
because it sort of made sense
now this is where Dr seyfried's work
come in okay so Dr Thomas Seyfried he
looked at this for many many years now
and he looked at all different kinds of
cancer lines and he said well they seem
to not only use glucose and fermenting
that but they can ferment a second fuel
source which is glutamine
glutamine is a non-essential amino acid
non-essential means it's an amino acid
that our own body can generate so you
don't have to necessarily take it in
from from food from from proteins but
your own body can make it right which is
not great so we can't easily cut it out
so even if I restricted your diet of all
proteins you would still make glutamine
right so it can't be influenced by diet
very much again to some extent but not
great
so he said well some cancers
predominantly use glucose and those are
the ones that on the ketogenic diet did
really well right these people get
better
but then there are some cancer cells
that also use glutamine and they did not
get better you know they got a little
bit better maybe because they might use
both fuels right but because they can
live fairly well on glutamine
this this cancer didn't go away just by
putting them on a ketogenic diet so what
he said well we have to block both
but then the question was of course how
do you block glutamine a non-essential
amino acid right and he figured out a
way and that is a medication that was
developed in the 1950s already called
Don
it's abbreviation
foreign
-oxone or leucine has been around since
the 1950s and what it does it blocks the
production and uptake of glutamine so
this cannot be given all the time in
higher doses so they either give it low
dose continuously or they give it once
or twice a week in a higher dose because
they can only block this intermittently
and in that time again so the patient is
on a ketogenic diet so they're not using
eating any sugars so there's no glucose
coming in and then they're blocking
glutamine the second fuel that many of
those cancer cells are using right
another cancer cell and Cancers remember
they need a lot of energy so even if you
cut out glutamine for a short time they
can survive usually and that's how this
whole thing works right you're taking
away the fuel that these cells need to
live and these cells die off right now
the Don is um you know in under under
study but it's not available
commercially yet so that means most
clinics are not able to use this in my
that's at least my understanding they're
using this for research purposes however
there are some supplements that also
block or decrease glutamine either they
block the production of glutamine or the
uptake of glutamine and they can be used
even on a daily basis again always you
should discuss all of this with your
treating position but there are things
like berberine there's green tea extract
and a few others even some medications
like some anti-malaria drugs have been
shown to block glutamine so again that's
something that you could discuss with
your physician you know but it is
possible to at least decrease the amount
of glutamine coming in and remember
these cells need a lot of this and if
we're blocking it even to some extent
people tend to get better
another
therapy that this could and my opinion
should be combined with is intermittent
fasting now a lot of times this is done
for several days once a month so some
people do like a five day fast once a
month some people do one day like a
24-hour period every week of
intermittent fasting because remember
most of your cells when you go into a
fast again you're running on ketones
your body works just fine you have
plenty of fat you know even if you're
thin there's plenty of fat that the body
can use to to generate energy
um however again this is a fuel that
cancer cells cannot use and taking that
away for prolonger long periods of time
more cells die off which is really a
fascinating concept right again
discusses with your Physicians sometimes
if you have a patient where you know
they're very very thin already and
malnourished they might not want to go
on intermittent fasting so all these
things should be discussed with your
treating position
now one thing that Dr safety points out
is that in his belief is that cancer
starts as a metabolic disorder so in
other words it's the mitochondria
these guys here that first get damaged
as they get damaged they produce radical
oxygen species so these really really
dangerous molecules that then damage the
DNA because remember cancer cells have
both they have damage DNA and
malfunctioning mitochondria and
according to Dr safely it starts with
the mitochondria therefore he believes
that cancer should be thought of as a
metabolic disorder a metabolic therapy
then would be the first thing we should
absolutely do and Implement now this can
be used together with chemotherapy and
maybe with chemother's hair at a lower
dose to reduce side effects these are
all possibilities and I think it's
important not to close the door on those
things either you know some people might
Implement metabolic therapy and it might
not work sufficiently for them for
various reasons but then if they do this
together with low-dose chemotherapy
suddenly they get very good results so I
think it should be very open and as I
said discuss these things with your
primary care or your oncologist to see
what would work for you
one reason why sometimes metabolic
therapy doesn't work well is because
people are not really in a in a in
ketosis so they are still taking in too
many carbohydrates and it's not easy to
follow this right it's something that
you nearly got to do a lot of um
research to understand what you can eat
and what you shouldn't eat and then you
should test yourself either there's
these urine sticks you can get or you
can take a um a little finger prick and
test your blood to see where your Ketone
levels are that's actually very
important to do right but I think this
is very fascinating that um this is here
I would agree it makes sense to me that
cancer can be thought of as a metabolic
disorder Studies have been done I'm
going to do another video about this to
show that when you have a cancer cell
with a cancer nucleus and you put that
damaged nucleus into a healthy cell with
healthy mitochondria it is not a cancer
anymore so again and vice versa if you
put a healthy cell with healthy DNA into
a cancer cell with damaged mitochondria
it can continues to be a cancer cell so
that kind of shows us that it seems to
be that at least from these studies
the mitochondria are more important in
understanding why a cell is a cancer
cell than the damage in the DNA right so
I think there's a lot of marriage to
this a theory and it's been used at
least in small and it's one of cases
very successfully it's been used in cell
lines and the research from Dr safri I
think is very fascinating he's looked at
many different cell lines one criticism
was people will say well what about
fatty acids you know can't tumors use
fatty acids according to him he hasn't
found any lines yet to reduce fatty
acids so to summarize metabolic therapy
uses the underlying principle that
cancer cells have malfunctioning
mitochondria and they can only ferment
which is a very simple way of energy
production glucose and glutamine and by
taking both of those away these cells
will die and I think it's a fascinating
concept I think it should be implemented
by virtually anyone diagnosed with
cancer of course after talking to your
oncologist or your other treating
Physicians making sure there's no
contraindications to this and it can
certainly use be used together with
other modalities it can be used even
with low dose of chemotherapy of course
it can be used for things like surgery
right I think these are complementary to
each other I think that Physicians
should educate themselves on this I
think it's hugely important and I think
it should be the fundamental in
treatment again only my opinion always
check with the doctor first right all
right so please um subscribe and leave a
comment or question a lot of my content
is strongly influenced by the comments
of questions that I get thank you very
much